In this lesson will be learning about your web browsers developer tools.
More specifically we will be taking a look at your browser's ability to inspect elements.
By the end of this lesson you will understand how invaluable it is to be able to inspect an element
with your browser's developer tools and you may actually be frustrated that I didn't show you this earlier
but trust me there's a method to my madness.
I wanted to make sure that you had a solid understanding of CSSA basics before introducing you to any
new tools.
By this point in the course you have more than enough knowledge.
So let's dive right in.
In every modern web browser you can right click on any element on the page and select inspect element
.
This will pool up your developer tools in Inspector mode.
Now this will look a bit different depending on the browser you're using.
I'm using Firefox Google Chromes and Specter is very similar.
You'll see on the left side a bird's eye view of your age TMLC structure.
Now we originally right clicked on the sidebar text and clicked inspect element.
So by default that paragraph is selected and on the right side of our developer to a window we can see
all of the properties of the styles associated with that paragraph of text with the element that's selected
.
So we can see that there is a rule targeting the side bar and that's where it's getting its font size
We can see that it is receiving its font family trickle down from the body element.
We can see that it's receiving its line height or line spacing trickled down from the HVM metal element
and we can override or customize these values on the fly.
So this rule with saying sidebar text should have a font size of 85 percent.
We can simply click on that and use the arrow keys on our keyboard or even just type in a new value
.
So I can bump this up to ninety five percent for any value that we want and you can see it's updating
in real time behind the developer tool window.
So let's imagine that we decide 114 percent looks excellent.
Now the developer tools on its own won't save that change for us and as soon as we reload the page it
reverts back to before we even launched developer tools.
But you'll notice that developer tools tells us where in our stylesheet this rule is located.
So it's telling us it's in this file on line number 173 so we can go over to our stylesheet.
Scroll down the line 173 we know the exact line to go to.
Here it is.
And we know that 114 percent is what looked perfect in the web browser refresh.
And there you have it.
Now on the surface that may not appear to be very impressive but believe me as your web sites become
more and more complex it's invaluable to be able to trace down where a certain property is trickling
down from.
At times you wonder is this style coming from a direct selector or is it being inherited by a parent
element.
And as you can see the inspector makes it very simple to track down which properties are coming from
which rules.
Another neat feature of the inspector is this left pane that shows you a bird's eye view of your HMO
structure.
It can be hovered over with your mouse and they will outline in the browser behind it the element that
you're hovering over.
So if I hoover over body it highlights the entire page if I highlight over header shows it's the header
and then I can click on one of these arrows to drill down inside the header.
So if I hover over the heading there you go there's the paragraph.
We can drill down into the nav drill down into the unordered list.
You can see there's a list item for each link.
We can even drill down into one of the list items to find the actual link element and we can see all
of the properties that are assigned to the link elements we can see all of the properties that are trickling
down from ancestor elements.
And if we wanted to any of these properties like padding we can simply click on it and then type in
any value we want.
And it will update on the fly or we can even add new declarations entirely.
So if you click towards the end of a row you can see that it the cursor down here and we can say text
transform uppercase.
You can see updates on the fly in some browsers to add a new declaration on the fly you might need to
right click and click new declaration and others you can click towards the bottom of the room.
Now again as soon as you reload the page all of your changes will be gone.
But when you're trying to experiment or troubleshoot the ability to add things on the fly is completely
invaluable.
So we've established that your browser's inspector tool is amazing for tracking down where properties
are coming from.
It's excellent for experimenting or troubleshooting.
And finally I want to point out how amazing it is for getting inspiration from other sites.
So for example if you visit a Web site and you see an amazing effect they have a really neat layout
.
You see an element that's positioned in a neat way where you see any type of styling that you want to
try and emulate.
You can simply right click anywhere on the page or on a specific element.
Poke around a bit in the inspector and try and get a feel for which properties and values they're using
where they're assigning them how different elements are relating to one another.
The inspector can be one of your biggest allies in learning more and more complex.
I encourage you to play around with some of your favorite Web sites and take a peek under their hoods
.
Have fun and I will see you in the next lesson